[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This remark was made by an
Egyptian priest in the Temple
of Sais to a Greek scholar.
He went on to state how,
within historical ages,
and since Egypt
became a kingdom,
four times the sun
rose where it now sets
and twice he set
where he now rises.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
1,500 years later, the Egyptian
historian Ibn Abd al-Hakam was
still remarking on how so many
temples were designed to protect
the ancient knowledge of
the antediluvian gods.
And nowhere is the true age
of Egyptian civilization more
evident than along the
southern part of the Nile.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Contrary to belief, the
oldest mansions of the gods
are found toward Nubia, back in
the days when the Nile was once
a sea all the way to Ethiopia
and accessible from the Indian
Ocean.
On the Island of the
Elephant at Aswan,
the remains of one such temple
stand upon uncountable layers
of others.
The process has been
repeated for so long
that the sudden
end of the island
now resembles an
artificial hill.
It seems everyone sailed here
to honor one of the earliest
gods, the ram-headed Khnum,
protector of the waters
that sustained this land.
Khnum's assigned
duty was the creation
of humans whom he made from
clay on a potter's wheel.
And since he also
molded deities,
he was known as
the divine potter
and lord of things
created from himself.
A short ride up river
takes you to one
of the eight original
sacred mounds, P-aaleq,
the island of creation.
But if you were expecting
a magnificent spectacle,
you'd be disappointed.
A gate from the
Greek or Roman era
is the only hint that
there once existed
a sanctuary of enormous
importance here,
for the entire
site was submerged
following the construction
of the Aswan Dam.
P-aaleq was known as the
Island of the time of Ra.
And given that the reign of
Ra took place in 39,000 BC,
it makes P-aaleq the
oldest site in Egypt.
As one building crumbled,
so another took its place.
Like the act of creation
itself, one temple died
and another was born.
And this perpetual
state of regeneration
maintained the sanctity of the
island for thousands of years.
But just as P-aaleq was
being consumed by the rising
waters of the Nile, a
magical feat of engineering
led to one of history's
boldest rescue operations.
The site was transferred
block by block
to a nearby island, where
today it is known as Philae.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
To approach Philae by boat is
to experience the sacred mound
of the followers of Horus as it
once was, an island imitating
the pregnant act of
creation as it rises out
of the waters of chaos.
One text describes
the original site
as an entity that existed before
everything else, how it became
the first ground
of the ancestors
upon which the architect
of the gods Ptah
erected the first temple.
The great forecourt
honors Nectanebo who
restored this and other sites.
Philae's present buildings
were here long before his time.
Built as they are on two axes,
demonstrating how the temple was
periodically adjusted over
the course of 4,000 years
to compensate for the
gradual movement over time
of the celestial object
to which it was aligned.
This island of creation is the
domain of the divine bride,
Aset, Isis to the Greeks.
Every winter solstice, a boat
containing her effigy was taken
to the adjacent island of Bigeh
to consummate her union with
Osiris and produced the
divinely conceived child Horus
on December the 25th.
The story is conveyed in
the birth house at Philae
where Horus is shown sitting
on the lap of the divine bride.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The interior of the main temple
was once lush with color.
In its late stage, it was
even adapted into a church
by Copts escaping
religious persecution.
Their altar survives, as
do their crosses along
with those carved by the Knights
of Saint John and the Knights
Templar.
It seems everyone came to Philae
to honor the divine feminine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Philae also became one
of the first academies,
the starting point for initiates
in search of the mysteries,
a compendium of moral and
spiritual teachings known
as "the way of the gods," which
was also introduced into Japan
and South America by the
gods after the flood.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The learning process took
between 3 to 10 years.
To this effect, the great court
of Philae served as the academy.
It features 32 pillars and none
of its capitals are identical.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Before being recarved
by later pharaohs,
each pillar conveyed
in symbolic form
a facet of the mysteries
that came under the tutelage
of the god of wisdom himself.
In time, this set
of instructions
would form the body of the
33 Degrees in Freemasonry.
Once the overall lesson
was mastered at P-aaleq,
the candidate was sent
upriver to the next temple,
building on a foundation
of acquired knowledge
while at the same time soaking
up the energy hardwired
into every temple
in order to raise
the electrical current
flowing through the body.
The aim was to be
better prepared
for the final phase
of initiation,
which was conducted at Giza, the
domain of Isis consort, Osiris.
In essence, the
journey of the initiate
mirrored the divine
marriage in symbolic form.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Upriver from P-aaleq
comes the next place
of learning, Kom Ombo.
Listed in the building
text as a primordial mound,
the present temple
stands on thousands
of years of former buildings
that elevated the current site
40 feet above the Nile.
After it fell into
disuse, Kom Ombo
was nearly overwhelmed by
the debris of a town that
grew within and around it.
Among those honored here is
the architect of the universe
Ptah, the one who shapes the
words of Djehuty, the god
of wisdom, into physical form.
Isis also finds her place
here, as does one pharaoh who
is showered with the
knowledge of the gods
by Djehuty and Horus, by
which the lucky chap attains
everlasting life.
What a bad use of
one's time on earth.
Kom Ombo's primary function
in the path of initiation
lies in its double entrance,
a rare example in a temple.
The left corridor is dedicated
to the teachings and qualities
of Heru-ur, Horus
the elder, the hero
of daytime and the qualities
of the higher self.
The right corridor belongs to
his complementary opposite,
the crocodile god, Sobek,
the shadow self who
dwells in the night hours.
Depending on the
entrance one felt
attracted to, the initiate would
work on all aspects of the light
or shadow of personality,
harmonize the two,
and restored balance within.
Essentially, Kom
Ombo was the place
where you mastered
the art of duality.
And to achieve this, you
needed to conquer fear.
Egyptians dramatized a spiritual
concept with a passion play
where Horus was devoured
after sunset by Sobek.
However, as sunrise
approached, Sobek
was responsible for
the rebirth of Horus,
thus ensuring their
mutual survival.
Because without death, there is
no rebirth, there is no death.
And for this reason,
the crocodile
was both feared and revered.
All this took place inside an
enclosed series of chambers.
At the end of each
passage stands
a highly magnetic altar stone.
One is angled to project
the magnetic field upward,
the other downward,
creating a loop.
At this point in
the proceedings,
initiates who had
mastered duality
were tested by being led into a
lower chamber in which they had
to prove their control
of fear, which they did
by swimming with a crocodile and
pinning an earring to its ear.
And just to prove the
priests had a sense of humor,
they omitted to tell
the candidates they'd
given the reptile a
sedative to buy them
enough time to
complete the task.
The teaching of the two doors
also known as the Book of Gates
was practiced half a
world away in the oldest
section of Machu Picchu.
Inside a cleft cut into the
rock stand two false doors
that lead nowhere.
Coincidentally, the angle of
the stone above this chamber
is identical to that
used for the entrance
into the Great Pyramid of Giza.
In Greek times, the two
gates became the doors
of truth and falsehood,
an important component
in the Mystery
School of Zeno, which
the Greek philosopher learned
while studying in Egypt.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The path of initiation
continued downriver
to one of two original
prehistoric mounds of Horus.
Little remains of
Nekhen but rubble.
However, the second red
mound survives 9 miles away.
It is one of the
most dramatic sites
in Egypt, the Temple of Edfu.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Representing the Shining
Ones, followers of Horus, Edfu
is the home of the
hawk god Horus,
the one who overcomes the
challenges posed by a journey
to the underworld to emerge
purified and spiritualized,
a self-made solar hero.
With its face to
the equator, Edfu
is designed to stoke the
inner fire that gives strength
to complete the journey of life.
Ancient Egyptians stated
how a temple is not
a fully sacred space until it
stands upon the foundations
of 12 earlier sites.
Edfu fulfills that
requirement, resting
as it does upon multiple
foundations covered by thousands
of years of Nile silt while
incorporating elements
from earlier buildings in
the fabric of the structure
we see today.
Embracing this remote antiquity,
the axis of Edfu marks Orion
in its midheaven position on the
summer solstice in 10,500 BC.
At a stroke, it acknowledges
the constellation
associated with the
followers of Horus,
as well as the highest
position of light,
the mark of the solar hero
and the triumph of wisdom
over ignorance.
But above all,
the date coincides
with that anomalous agricultural
revolution on the Nile.
Still, Edfu did not
escape the decay that
comes with the mortal world.
A mud brick village sprouted
inside the compound.
30 feet of accumulated
rubbish and sand
raise the rubble
up to its ceiling,
nearly overwhelming the site.
French visitors in the 18th
century describe villagers
living on the roof and
discarding garbage,
a sight that led the novelist
Gustave Flaubert to remark,
"the village is situated around
the enormous temple and climbs
up part of it.
The temple serves as a public
lavatory for the whole village."
Towards the end of
the 19th century,
the site was finally
cleared of debris.
To access the interior,
French archeologists
had to be lowered through
a hole in the roof
and dig their way through
a thousand years of sewage
and household waste.
The English writer
Amelia Edwards
describes the
transformation, "now
standing free in
a deep open space
like a risen god
issuing from a grave,
the huge building
stands before us
in the sunshine,
erect and perfect.
The effect at first
sight is overwhelming."
Who enters that gate crosses the
threshold of the past and leaves
2,000 years behind him.
Edfu was restored
by Greek pharaohs
with images of Ptolemy
III dominating its facade.
But this is only half the story.
Appropriating other people's
buildings was commonplace.
For example, at Abusir, there
is a graffito written thousands
of years earlier than
the building later
claimed by pharaoh Sahure.
Still, there is
some truth to this.
Under Alexander the Great, the
Greeks found Edfu in tatters
and proceeded to restore it.
Ironically, the buildup of
waste after their departure
helped preserve their hard work.
The imposing entrance
leads to a central court.
Just as in Philae, it is framed
by 32 columns once covered
in secret teachings,
transforming the initiate
as the 33rd Degree as they
entered the body of a god given
visible shape in stone.
The temple also
served as a reminder
to the pilgrim of the
importance of honoring
the physical gods who brought
civilization to the land,
as well as the
gods in spirit form
who are intertwined
with and regulate
the proper flow of nature.
Thus, in the first
hall, 12 columns
represent the hours of
daylight and the qualities
of the gods assigned to each.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The kiosk served as a library.
The kind of card index
listing available books
is marked on the wall.
It seems Plato is late
returning his copy, accounting
for inflation that'll cost him.
The following haul,
by contrast, is
devoted to the 12 hours of
night and their assigned gods.
The stone still bears
the scars of creosote
from the campfires of
villagers who lived here.
At the core of the temple,
the sanctuary stands alone.
It is both a mound of creation
as well as the original island
domicile of Horus himself.
The walls outline the
qualities of this god.
As a metaphor, the falcon
hovers above the Earth.
It is no longer limited to what
is near but sees beyond cause
and effect to take
in the big picture
and its limitless horizon.
At the rear stands
an imposing altar
shaped from a single
block of syenite
and polished to perfection.
It once contained a
gold statue of the god.
But the focal point is
the solar barque of Horus.
It once housed stone
tablets inscribed
with the deeds and
qualities of the solar hero,
whose conduct set the tone
for moral and civic order.
In essence, this
receptacle is a precursor
to the Ark of the Covenant.
A serpent curves along
the mask of Horus,
indicating the use of life
force to amplify and sustain
the spiritual force.
Each year, the barque was
navigated down river to Luxor
for a festival marking the union
with Horus's consort, Hathor,
whose own barque arrived
from Dendera in celebration
of the abundance of the land.
During restoration
work, Greek scholars
came across something
of far greater value
among the rubble of
Edfu, the building texts.
The building texts
describe a remote period
in prehistoric times called
the early primeval age
of the gods, in which the
ancestors of the Egyptians
arrived from the island of fire
that lay amid the great ocean
to the South, where the
earliest mansions of the gods
were founded.
This sacred domain was the
abode of the followers of Horus.
And on occasion, the gods
would take a lucky human there
to see it.
The Edfu building texts state
that during this period,
there existed two
races: hunter-gatherers
with little knowledge
of civilization,
and an all together
different race of people
who lived remotely,
far more advanced
in engineering,
metallurgy, astronomy,
large-scale architecture,
natural magic, civic cohesion,
and navigation.
When a swarm of meteorites
caused havoc across the globe
and ushered the Ice
Age in 10,800 BC,
it forced a group of sages to
search for a potential new home
to set up the sacred mounds upon
which the future temples would
be built. Within 300 years, the
group of male and female gods
established themselves
along the Nile,
governing from Yunu and
other satellite temples,
and Edfu was one of them.
But soon, this golden
age of creation
was overrun by a second
catastrophe, a meteorite
and a flood destroyed
the island of fire.
The calamity is described as
the great leaping snake pierced
the domain of the
gods, the majority
of its divine
inhabitants drowned.
Companies of gods lucky
enough to be at sea survived.
Led by Horus and Djehuty, the
seven sages and builder gods
reluctantly wandered the world
as the crew of the falcon before
arriving in Southern
Egypt, in their words,
"to resurrect the former
world of the gods."
The decision to
rebuild here was due
to its geographical advantage in
a period marked by extreme cold
and the absence of sunlight.
Close to the equator, conditions
were warmer and humid.
And the extra rainfall benefited
the region as an ideal place
for the regeneration
of new forms of life.
Described as very tall,
elegant, and possessing
supernatural powers,
the followers of Horus
were experts in their field.
They constructed
sacred architecture
according to what the
sages of the primeval age
revealed to Djehuty.
They possessed the ability
to foretell the future,
endue with power the substances
on Earth to magnify things
and provide magical
protection by means of symbols
and the giving of names.
This dynasty of
semi-divine beings
governed Egypt until
they found humans
with integrity who were
capable of leading by example.
At which point, the followers
of Horus lived in the shadows.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
To read the walls
of Edfu is to dive
into a lost history
of the human race,
a time when we walked side
by side in mutual respect
with gods.
And yet the building texts are
scattered from wall to pillar,
indicating they are part of
a broader account recovered
in fragments by
Greek renovators who
carve the information on
every available space,
lest it be lost.
After all, the texts state
how they comprise nothing
less than the
words of the sages,
the only divine
beings who knew how
the temples and sacred
places were created.
Indeed, one distinguishing
characteristic of all the flood
gods was their knowledge
of the laws of nature
and how to bend them.
Demonstrating the point,
along the inner perimeter,
there is a recipe for
transforming an ordinary piece
of land into a portal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The manipulation of the
subtle forces of nature
occurs at Edfu itself.
The Earth's telluric currents
flow across the planet
in many forms.
One covered the
surface like a net.
Known as the Hartmann Grid,
this rectangular membrane
stretches around the
perimeter of Edfu
as though establishing
a protective force
field for the sacred mound.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The bloodline of the followers
of Horus was maintained
for 6,000 years after
the flood, until Menes,
who roasted a throne in 3200
BC, who is ascribed as the first
pharaoh of a purely
human bloodline.
Still, by 1500 BC, their
progeny occasionally
found their place on the
throne, such as Hatshepsut,
the queen depicted
with the beard,
but not because she was
pretending to be a man.
The ceremonial beard
identifies the ruler
as the wisdom-keeper
while acknowledging
their divine lineage, although
the symbol was often misused
by anyone claiming instant
godliness by association.
Hatshepsut left a few clues
about her special lineage.
For starters, she rebuilt
the Temple of Amun
at Djanet, where the original
creator gods are buried.
Then in her own temple, a
delicate set of frescoes
depict her alleged
voyage to a land
called Punt, a nickname
given to the island
from which the followers
of Horus originated.
However, this journey
would have been impossible
in the queen's time because
the island of the gods
is said to have been overwhelmed
by a falling meteor and rising
seas long before her time.
The account is retold
in Papyrus 1118
by a sailor who was
shipwrecked there and met
one of the surviving
gods shortly before it
vanished beneath the waves.
Like the sailor,
Hatshepsut's journey
takes her into the
Indian Ocean to a land
of beehive huts, special trees,
precious goods, and incense.
It may have been her subtle way
of advertising her connection
to the bloodline,
especially as the next mural
describes the divine principle
incarnating in mankind
whose earthly representative
is Hatshepsut.
The queen's temple
appears deceptively simple
but is, in fact,
full of surprises.
In contrast with the funerary
function of the adjacent valleys
of the kings and
queens, her temple
stands out in its
dedication to fertility.
Partly integrated into the
cliff face and partly inside it,
it expresses an act
of impregnation.
The effect is dramatized by
directing the axis of the temple
to the rising
winter solstice sun
so that the first
shaft of light is
conducted along a series of
ramps into an altar at the top.
Before the desert took over,
the approach to the temple
was made along an avenue of
Sphinx, reflective pools,
and flower beds.
Rows of 11 columns define
this as a solar temple,
11 years being
the sunspot cycle.
Three ascending levels symbolize
the trinity of creation
and the spiritual aspiration
of the individual.
With its rigidity and
absence of adornment,
the design projects
strength and masculinity.
It is sober, symbolic,
and commanding.
Hatshepsut's
architect, Senenmut,
who is buried on the
side of the hill,
brought a masterpiece
of elegance, harmony,
and proportion out of
a rough wall of rock.
His exercise in geomancy
influenced architects
for centuries, particularly
Albert Speer in Germany during
the 1930s and the
style of Art Deco.
At the head of each ramp
stands a protective falcon,
who is artfully integrated
into the balustrade as two
intertwined serpents,
indicating the flow
of electromagnetic
current as it rises
towards the core of the temple.
At the top, the
beam of sunrise is
focused through a series of
narrow doorways each carved
in contrasting granite,
the stone symbolizing
the solar masculine
principle before piercing
the Chapel of Amun inside
the womb of the cliff
and illuminating the
statue of this creator god.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
On the middle level lies
the Chapel of Hathor,
the House of Horus.
Here Hatshepsut pays homage
to the goddess Hathor
in the form of a cow,
emphasizing one of her roles
as provider of nourishment
in the physical as well
as spiritual sense.
The chapel also pays tribute to
the ancient festival of Adhir,
which remembers the great flood
generated by the Taurid meteor
shower in the month of November
and the survivors, which
included the followers of Horus.
Complementing this
at the opposite end
is a rare chapel
dedicated to Anubis,
which sits beneath a
painted canopy of stars.
Anubis is the opener of
the way, the black dog who
uses his homing
instinct and the ability
to see in the dark
of the other world
while the departed
soul acclimates
to its new and
confusing environment.
the decor is delicate
and painstakingly
shaped in relief
out of limestone.
The queen is pictured
making offerings
to Horus, the god of
rebirth, while a moon
watches over the proceedings.
Hatshepsut wasn't
the only ruler who
followed in the
footsteps of the gods
in the hope of ensuring their
genius for generations to come.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A 4-hour drive through the
desert leads to a place that was
already a focal point of
veneration by 5400 BC, Abedju,
what Greeks would
later call Abydos.
Rumor had it that Osiris
himself was buried somewhere
in the surrounding
hills, creating
a rush by many early kings to
build monuments and mortuary
temples here.
4,000 years later, it was the
turn of Seti I when he added his
own masterpiece 50 feet above
the original level of the Nile,
which itself is
now 7 miles away.
Earthquakes, war,
and general pillaging
cost the building its main
entrance and courtyard,
leaving an open space and a
blocking of six of its seven
corridors.
The modern restoration is
nothing short of miraculous.
Seti was a student of
the mysteries teachings
and he made sure the
visitor knew this
when approaching his temple.
Each staircase is
accurately reconstructed
with 42 steps, each one
representing the assessors
in the underworld
who will remind
you of your deeds and misdeeds
during your incarnation
on Earth.
In sharp contrast with
his spiritual sensitivity,
Seti's son Ramesses II
redecorated his father's
grand enterprise by recarving
the facade with images
of himself and his conquests.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And once he'd started,
he kept going.
Every inch of the first
hole was similarly recarved
with images of
Ramesses showering
the gods with
offerings and being
glorified by them in return.
It may seem like an exercise in
narcissism but to his credit,
Ramesses spent much of his life
removing invaders from Egypt,
or engaging in war
with its enemies,
or dealing with the
bankrupt treasury.
What few minutes
of the day remained
were usually spent procreating.
Ramesses boasted no
less than 103 children.
Clearly, stamina was not an
issue for this larger than life
character.
Fortunately, the
remainder of the temple
remains as his father intended.
The modern restoration has
slowly uncovered its secrets
out of layers of
creosote deposited
by villagers who later turned
the site into an apartment
complex.
The panels follow Seti's
spiritual development
through his understanding of
the knowledge of the gods.
And having applied it
in his words and deeds,
he was reborn just
like the god Horus.
As the gods themselves
once declared,
to follow their example
is to achieve immortality.
But Seti's vision went beyond
leaving a record of his journey
into enlightenment.
Seven corridors lead to
seven individual sanctuaries.
As one inches towards
them, the floor
rises to bring the
seeker ever closer
to the domain of the gods.
Each sanctuary is dedicated
to the life and attributes
of a specific deity.
By meditating on
these qualities,
the seeker identified
patterns of behavior
in need of finessing
or addressing.
And by implementing new
ideas in their daily habits,
they gradually improved
towards the desired aim
of spiritual perfection.
In essence, Seti established a
vehicle for self development.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The first sanctuary
is dedicated to Horus,
followed by his mother, Isis.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Osiris completes this trinity
and is given six rooms.
The name Osiris is a
Greek transliteration,
his original name was Asar, from
which derives the title vizier,
and later, wizard.
One panel depicts
the passage of Osiris
into the underworld
aboard a sailor boat.
While overhead, his
cartouche carries his name
across the starry sky
and into eternity.
In one striking scene, he is
administering to the djed pillar
with his consort, Isis.
The djed is said to represent
the stability of life.
So it is interesting
that it should
be inclined at 22 degrees,
the minimum angle of tilt
of the Earth, whose movement
generates the seasons
and allows the planet
to sustain life.
All forms and
functions of this god
are represented here, along
with ceremonies related
to his journey
into the underworld
and his subsequent resurrection.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The next chapel focuses on
the qualities of Amun-Ra,
in which the knowledge
of the creator god
is transmitted to Seti by
the use of a kamsar, a hand
gesture aimed at the third eye
creating a bridge from one being
to another.
Seti declares he has a
clear conscience when
applying this restricted
information which
he will protect at all costs.
Throughout his
initiatory journey,
Seti has shown making
offerings to Isis,
who in turn nurtures
him with her wisdom
by breastfeeding the pharaoh.
And in turn, a young
Seti takes his position
on her lap as Horus, the child
reborn through divine knowledge.
In the Chapel of
Ra-Horakhty, the candidate
seeks illumination
during the daylight hours
as he follows the path of the
rising sun towards sunset.
Finding himself in
a state of balance,
the candidate is
now in a position
to manifest on the
physical plane.
And for this to occur,
there is no better teacher
than the great
architect himself, Ptah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
At the height of
his accomplishment,
Seti is given his own chapel in
which he is honored by Djehuty
for using his wisdom wisely.
And by Seshat, goddess
of sacred buildings
who writes his name into
immortality for constructing
a temple according
to the protocol
set down by the
followers of Horus.
Or did he?
By far, the most potent
room is the Holy of Holies.
There is a powerful yet
humbling presence here,
the combination of Earth
energy and thousand years
of accumulated devotion.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The problem is,
the room is located
in the wrong part of the
building according to protocol,
the temple ought to
represent a bodily form
from feet to the head.
Technically, the Holy of Holies
should extend beyond the Osiris
room, but it doesn't.
Seti abruptly changed
the axis of the temple,
and the building took on the
shape of an L, a total violation
of protocol.
Seti was an astute
student of temple culture.
Only an unforeseen
structural issue
would have forced such a
radical departure from normal.
The answer to his
apparent madness
lies beyond the rear wall
of the Osiris chapel.
The area behind
Seti's temple looks
much like it did a century ago
when the depression in the sand
inspired a large
digging operation.
As the debris was removed,
it revealed a building so out
of place that people wondered
what it was doing there.
The Osireion is categorically
different from anything
in ancient Egypt.
At first glance, it appears
to be an underground temple.
But close inspection reveals
a building overwhelmed by silt
deposited during a long
period of intense flooding
and rainfall, a period
that lasted up to 7,000 BC.
This alone makes the
Osireion 9,000 years old.
In contrast to
Seti's ornate temple,
it is stark and minimalist,
constructed with the biggest
blocks of stone in Egypt.
At 100 tons apiece, one
wonders how early navigators
were able to ship them 300
miles from the quarry at Aswan.
Visually, the Osireion's
closest relative
is the Valley Temple at Giza.
And like the Valley, Temple
it too was accessed by boat
and encircled by the
waters of the Nile.
The Osireion is named for
Osiris although this was
an invention by archeologists.
There is no sign the
god was buried here.
And although many
pharaohs came to Abydos
to honor him, by 3500 BC
none of their monuments
related to the Osireion as
though it was already lost
beneath the silt and the sand.
When it was finally excavated,
the formidable architraves
that once formed the
ceiling were found
cracked and collapsed as though
an enormous weight compromised
the integrity of the building.
It is possible that
Seti rediscovered the
by then underground structure
and built his new temple
above it because both
buildings share the same axis.
But the weight of his temple
placed an impossible burden
on the compromised stone below,
collapsing it and forcing
Seti to alter his plan.
Because Seti is
Holy of Holies ought
to be right above the Osireion.
Seti carved a handful of
hieroglyphs to tell us
he was here.
Yet judging by the advanced
megalithic architecture,
he was certainly
not the builder.
Case in point, the
ceremonial tunnel
Seti attached to the
rear of the Osireion
is made of crude mudbrick.
At the end of the tunnel
are two important texts.
The Book of Gates
and the book of what
is in the underworld,
an orientation
map of the underworld and
what the initiate should
expect to see there.
A bass relief features the
titles of its gatekeeper Osiris.
This is carved from
inferior limestone
blocks which pale in quality
as one enters the Osireion.
The heart of the Osireion is
a massive sandstone platform
surrounded by an 18-foot deep
moat fed by an underground
spring, giving the platform
the appearance of an island,
the primordial mound of creation
rising out of the waters
of chaos.
Two sets of steps are
carved at each end,
providing places to disembark.
There are two recesses in the
center, a square representing
the physical world, and the
rectangle in the proportion
of the Golden Ratio, the
mathematical progression
at the core of plants,
shells, and animals.
As if continuing the
theme of creation,
the five flower of
life diagrams painted
with a mixture of egg
yolk, dissolved limestone,
and red ocher appear on the
inner face of one monolith.
Their awkward
position near the top
suggests they were added
much later, possibly
by the Greeks when the site was
still partly exposed but covered
with rubble.
What is the building
trying to say?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The surrounding wall
of sandstone blocks
contains 17 side chambers.
This unique number
is found in some
of the oldest temples on
the planet, all of which
are associated with teachings
introduced by antediluvian gods
and sages who followed
in their footsteps.
Called "the way of the gods,"
it is found in other 17 chamber
sites such as Qenko in
Peru and Meath in Ireland.
If so, then the 17
teachings of the gods
surround this
island of creation,
whose 10 massive granite
pillars prop up the sky.
The teachings are the means of
connecting to the heavenly world
of the gods.
The Osireion, it
seems, is nothing less
than an umbilical cord
linking the material world
to the supernatural.
Beyond what was originally
the entrance looking out
to the Nile, Seti added another
corridor made of limestone.
Its gabled ceiling
features the Book of Nut
in which the sky
goddess is supported
by Shu, the god of air.
Its astronomical texts
outline the interrelationship
between the realm of Earth
and sky overseen by Shu.
On the opposite ceiling
is a description
of the hours of day and
night, its associated gods,
and the interrelationship
with the underworld.
The Osireion is a great teaching
device depicting in graphic form
the very act of creation
when the knowledge of a god
impregnated the
original mound which
rose above the waters of chaos.
And inside its chambers were
taught the rules of nature
and how a mortal person
can learn to bend them,
just as ancient Egyptians once
said of the gods themselves.
But the act of creation
requires two individuals.
So perhaps we should be
looking less at Osiris
and more at his consort, Isis.
And to this effect,
Seti cunningly
left a clue in the
corner of the very
last room of his own temple.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The whole of Sekir describes
the rebirth of Seti
with the help of the god
attributed with this function.
The falcon-headed god is shown
standing at the foot of a bier,
while Isis in the
form of a kite hawk
hovers above a horizontal Seti.
As the kite hawk of Osiris,
Isis demonstrates her ability
to fan the breath of immortality
into those entrusted to her.
For this to occur,
the soul of the hero
must travel to the region of
regeneration, the pole star,
which is protected by 7 akhu,
the seven circumpolar stars that
rotate around it but never set.
Like the soul, they are
the indestructibles.
And the star Deneb the
constellation of Cygnus
is one of them.
But long before Cygnus
was depicted as a swan,
it took on the form
of a kite hawk.
If the constellation could be
associated with the Osireion,
we may yet discover
its true age,
When Seti built his temple,
he violated a second protocol.
It fails to align with
any celestial object.
It does, however, share the
same unusual 36-degree axis with
the Osireion.
Rolling back the sky,
a person looking out
the original entrance
of the Osireion
at the time of its
inauguration would
have experienced a sight
both magical and theatrical
on the winter solstice
as Cygnus rose
in union along a vertical
river of stars, the Milky Way.
With its bright star, the
indestructible Deneb appearing
through the doorway
in 10,500 BC.
It seems Seti wasn't
so much concerned
with his own
accomplishment as he
was with resurrecting a temple
built by the followers of Horus
to transmit their
knowledge to those
who had come searching
for it thousands
of years in the future.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Any culture with an
incredibly long life span
inevitably gathers a
vast amount of experience
on the nature of life and
the universe, not to mention
an understanding of the
mechanics of the underworld,
how to get there, and how
to find your way back.
As we shall see, the
followers of Horus
made it look effortless.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[AUDIO LOGO]